AMBER HINDS: WordPress
Accessibility Day 2023:
Lightning Talk -
Making a Visual Tool Accessible
to Screen readers, with Speakers,
Amber Hinds, CEO,
Equalized Digital.
This presentation was
recorded September 28, 2023.
Hello, everyone.
My name is Amber Hinds.
I'm the CEO of Equalized
Digital, and I'm excited
to be presenting Making
a Visual Tool Accessible
to Screen reader users
along with Raghavendra.
Raghavendra,
do you want to introduce yourself?
RAGHAVENDRA: Hi, everyone.
My name is Raghavendra.
I am the founder
of DigitalA11y.com.
I'm a certified professional
in Web Accessibility.
AMBER: So I'm going to
start by playing a short video.
It doesn't have any sound in it.
I'm going to explain what's
happening and describe it for anyone
who can't see.
And it is something that
sort of shows what we built
and what we were talking about
trying to make accessible to people
who are screen reader users.
So this is the block editor.
We're scrolling down
below the editor.
There is a meta box for
accessibility checker.
And then I'm going to the
Details tab, and I'm just going
to click on the Image
Missing Alternative Text.
There are two issues, and I can
now click a link that says View
on Page, and that will take me
to the front-end of the website,
and it will load the issue
and highlight that image
that was missing alternative
text, to help me find it.
Then I go find it up
in the block editor,
and I just add the
alternative text.
So I'm writing...
This is an image of a person.
I tried to type
David wearing a suit.
I had a typo, so I fixed it.
And I hit Save.
And then if I update my post,
when I scroll back down,
to the Accessibility Checker
box, updates,
and I can see there's only one
image missing alternative text.
Just pausing for a second.
This works pretty well for things
that are in the block editor.
Usually it's easy, especially if
it's an image to see it and say,
OK, I know what this is.
But we're going to look at
aria-hidden now, and we'll see...
So we'll see if I go,
I've expanded aria-hidden.
I see these social media links.
I scroll up.
Oh, they're not in my post.
So if I click View on Page,
where this is helpful, it's going
to show me again on the
front end where this shows up
and it's down in the footer.
So I would know, oh,
if I want to fix this, I would have
to go fix this in my widgets or
wherever my footer content is created
on the post.
Now, if I refresh the page,
I'm going to show you a little bit
of what it looks like
to just walk through
the accessibility checker
issues purely on the front-end
without reading them on
the table on the back-end.
It's going to load.
It says 20 errors and 6 warnings.
There is a box there in the
bottom right corner, and on it,
there's buttons for
previous and next.
And you can click through and
it will move through each issue.
So we're seeing image,
empty alternative text,
improper use of link,
incorrect heading order and
it's jumping through the page
and highlighting different
elements on the page.
What if we get to something
that we're not sure about?
So I can see this graduate
programs, advanced degrees.
It's saying improper use of link.
And I think, well,
that's really weird.
I think that's a link that works.
This is where we added a Show Code
functionality on the front-end.
So I can click Show Code,
it will show me the link and oh,
I see, it says, href.
The href on the link is actually
going to a hashtag, It's not going
to an actual link.
So that's something where
I forgot to put in the link
where See Events figures
it's supposed to go.
So that explains to me why this
is saying this isn't a link.
Of course,
it's supposed to be a link.
It's just missing the URL.
Then sometimes we get things where
we can't actually see the element
because it's hidden,
and we've added a warning
that says the element is not
visual, try a disabling style.
So let me show you how that works.
There is a disabled styles button in
the main accessibility checker panel,
and if we click that,
then it will load the entire page.
I can see in this instance
that it is a search button,
which I can see up at
the top of the page.
I have my Skip-to-content link.
I have Current Students,
Maps Directory giving.
So if I come back and I enable
styles again, I get my page
and I can see, oh,
I have a search icon at the top,
right next to those other items
if I click on it, then this is
where that button is that
doesn't have sufficient contrast.
It's highlighting what just
looks like an empty white square,
because I think that there is a white
icon on a white background here.
So this is one way that I can help
find things if they're not visible.
And as you can see, it's targeted
at sighted users, but our goal
with this was not to make something
that only sighted people can use.
I want to touch for a
minute on why we made
this tool screen reader accessible
and why we've been focusing on this.
But for us,
it really aligned with our vision.
We really are striving towards a day
when all people have equal access
to information and
tools on the internet,
regardless of their ability.
And so because of that,
it made sense for us to also ensure
that even our visual tools work
for people who don't have sight.
I also think that there are use
cases for screen reader users
who want to go through issues
that the plug-in is identifying
in the front-end context.
It allows them to reach other
elements on the website that, maybe,
are adjacent to code that's been
flagged or wrapped around it.
And then the other thing is for
us, this is a step towards building
something that allows accessibility
testers to log issues in the plug-in
as they manually test.
It's something that we
know we're going to do.
I don't have a timeline for it
yet, but this is the beginning
of being able to show that we
can have something that functions
on the front-end of the website
on top of the website itself
and integrates with the plug-in
without causing problems
for perhaps a blind tester
who is auditing the website.
And then there is a bullet
point of legal compliance.
Legal compliance has nothing
to do with this on our end,
but I wanted to say that because
if you're trying to justify
why a visual tool that you are
building, whether it's for a client
or for your own company,
and you need to justify that
to higher-ups at the company,
why you're spending your time on it,
legal compliance may be a good
reason to justify investing
in accessibility of everything
you build, even things
that you think are
targeted at sighted users,
more than a non-sighted user.
So we decided we wanted to do it.
How have we tested it so far?
All of our devs do accessibility
testing and then we also come in.
I accessibility test,
and we have people like Raghavendra,
an accessibility specialist at our
company who do accessibility testing.
We do manual keyboard
testing, zoomed into 400%.
That modal window that you
saw, we made sure that
even if it is overlaid on top of the
website and the website is zoomed
in 400%, someone who is a low
vision user, you can't see a lot
of the website, but you can still
interact with all of the content
in the modal, it functions
from a reflow perspective.
I did screen reader
testing voiceover on Mac
and Raghavendra did screen
reader testing in VDM windows
and possibly JAWS
on windows as well.
So I want to hand it over to
Raghavendra now so you can see
how he experiences the plug-in
with his screen reader.
Raghavendra,
do you want to take it away?
RAGHAVENDRA: So since I'm
demoing the accessibility checkup
plug-in here, if I have to go...
Right now, this is the editor.
[Screen Reader Voice]
So these are all the blocks
but if I need to jump
just to the accessibility
checker, I'm going
to press the key number
two on my keyboard
and it will take me to the heading
level two within this editor.
[Screen Reader Voice]
And which is the
accessibility checker.
The accessibility checker is
very easy to navigate over here.
[Screen Reader Voice]
And it is expanded on the content...
I can collapse the content.
[Screen Reader Voice]
And the summary,
Details, [Screen Reader Voice]
Readability.
This is a self-explanatory,
the summary of issues, the details
of issues and the readability
score, if this content is readable.
AMBER: For the developers
in the room it's worth noting
that this is an element that we
actually ended up remediating
after doing accessibility tests.
As you can see in the code here these
tabs were actually originally coded
as links and then we did
our screen reader testing,
and we realized that they
needed to be buttons.
And so we used ARIA
role equals button
and added some button functionality
and then we used ARIA current
equals true, to communicate
to screen reader users which
tab is currently being viewed.
RAGHAVENDRA:
[Screen Reader Voice]
I'm just pressing down
arrow here just to navigate
through the static text.
[Screen Reader Voice]
So we finished the
accessibility checker time here.
If I need to go back,
I'm going to press Shift B.
" [Screen Reader Voice]
So I activated detail.
[Screen Reader Voice]
So we have headings for each issue.
So I'll just navigate between
the issues using Header H key.
[Screen Reader Voice]
So another issue that we are going
to watch; an example here is–
[Screen Reader Voice]
–images missing alternate text,
and, [Screen Reader Voice]
I expanded the list
of issues over here.
[Screen Reader Voice]
We have the issue ID.
AMBER: You'll notice as
Raghavendra goes through this
with the screen reader,
that you're hearing headings
that are not visible on the
page and also issue IDs.
This was another enhancement that
we made after doing user testing
and getting feedback.
For a sighted person,
they don't really need the issue ID
and they're seeing this
displayed as if it's a table,
but it couldn't be coded as a table
because of some of the complex
functionality that needs
to happen around our ignore
settings screen visibility.
So where we landed was,
we are pulling the issue ID
from the database, and outputting
that in a heading above each section
for screen reader users,
and then we reference that.
So on the image, for example, we
don't know what the alternative text
for this is, because the user
obviously didn't provide it.
So we've given an alternative
text that references the ID number
for the issue, which then makes
it more clear that this image goes
with that issue.
[Screen Reader Voice]
RAGHAVENDRA: So when I
read the testimonial avatar,
I knew this is part of the
testimonial block somewhere.
So I can do two things.
I can go fix it in the testimonial
block within the back-end editor,
but I would want to check which
issue is it in the front-end.
So what I do is generally...
[Screen Reader Voice]
So I'm going to open it.
AMBER: So I think
it's worth noting here,
we had a lot of internal
conversations about this,
and whether or not we'll keep it
as there's two separate modals,
almost that are up over the page.
But one thing initially,
they were jumping focus
when you hit that next button
actually to the element on the page.
But then I'm like,
it's really hard to get back
to what the problem actually was.
So what I had them do was
take the focus into the modal
that explains the issue,
which I think works a little better.
RAGHAVENDRA: So
this is more helpful.
The sighted screen reader user who
is also an accessibility specialist
is more interested in the code,
because they can guide the developer
or the person with whom they
are working towards the code.
And for non-technical people,
a regular WordPress user,
the issue gets highlighted.
It's easy for them to fix it.
As I said,
my site assistant was a Designer
and she never used
WordPress in her life.
And she used WordPress,
she used Gutenberg,
she's able to design websites.
This one got her up to speed
on accessibility much faster
rather than any other
Chrome extension.
AMBER: This was a fast look at
some of the things we've been doing
to make equalized digital
accessibility checker more accessible
for screen reader users.
I hope that you've
found it interesting
to see how Raghavendra engages
with the plug-in,
and also that it's inspiring.
I want to leave you
with two action items.
The first is for
plug-in developers.
Please test your plug-ins
with a screen reader,
or if you're not sure how,
hire a tester to test it for you.
Decide what you can fix this week.
Even if it's small,
you can make a big difference.
Website creators,
try using a screen reader,
or an automated tool like
accessibility checker.
We have a free version on
WordPress.org to find problems
on your website,
and make a plan for fixes.
There are tons of people here
at WordPress Accessibility Day
in the chat or speaking or
among the organizing team
who would be happy to help.
Reach out, get started now.
Thanks so much.
And if you want to learn more
about me and accessibility checker,
visit Equalizedigital.com.
Thank you to WordPress
Accessibility Day 2023 Sponsors.
Platinum Sponsor -
Equalize Digital.
Equalize Digital's
accessibility checker plugin
is an automated
accessibility scanning tool
that helps WordPress websites
become and stay accessible.
Platinum Sponsor - Gravity forms.
Gravity forms is the professional
form builder that you need
to create beautiful,
powerful and accessible forms.
Gold sponsors - 20i, Deque,
Empire Caption Solutions, Pressable,
and WP Engine.
Silver sponsors - Code Geek, Drake
Cooper, GoDaddy, LoneRock Point,
NerdPress, Overnight website by
Kinetic Iris, Raiola Networks,
A11Y Collective, and The Blogsmith.
Bronze sponsors - ExcessaCart,
GreenGeeks Web Hosting,
Hall Analysis SEO Consulting,
HDC, ITX, Ivy Cat, Medabots,
Pixel Chefs,
Simply Schedule Appointments,
SiteGround, Termageddon,
Underrepresented in
Tech, Weglot, and Yoast.